---
title: Working Hard and AI 
---

Two years ago in my Sophomore year of college things started changing. ChatGPT was the cool new thing. I remember that teachers didn't know how to respond to it the first few months of it being widely adopted. Laptops in lecture went from Notability to the familiar chat prompt site. It was cool to be able to look up a topic and get an explanation generated for you as part of your existing chat conversation. Pretty quickly, word spread that AI could even write code for you. Looking back at the rise and integration of AI into college and the impact it had on me, I am thankful it took me away from the option of middle ground coasting even though I am still paying the cost.

## New Industry Tool

I was just finished with the freshman CS courses when AI and Copilot came to the college scene. I had switched from mechanical engineering because I liked coding more than physics, despite the brutal challenge it was. I had busted my butt in those worn out desk chairs in the CS 111 TA office. What was really exciting for me was getting to go through the process of learning the building blocks that make up all the possible code. Like Emmett from the Lego Movie, my mind was blank to the possibilities around me in this little 2014 Macbook. After putting in my first 200 hours in the coding saddle, I started to have the Master Builder vision that Emmett gets at the end of the movie. It was small, but now, anything was possible. I was convinced I would be the one to make the perfect data structure. 

I was hearing about AI and seeing it all around me in classes. I had defaulted to not using it until professors explicitly told me to use it, and I was surprised to hear a professor comment a couple weeks into class that he wanted all his students to lean into AI, because it was the future. I installed Github Copilot into my JetBrains IDE that afternoon. I was sure if this professor thought it would be vital to coding, then I should just have it now and get used to using it. I started asking Copilot the questions I was asking StackOverflow, and it was amazing that the answers were always the right answer for my question. I didn't have to put 5 different solutions together to make my own anymore. It now took me half the time to debug code, and I didn't need the TA office anymore. 

## Working Smarter 

I was the new genius on the block. I started a new job in a research lab on campus, and AI was helping me learn new languages and "write" code. At this point, AI was more than a better StackOverflow, it had become the main code writer. Copilot was the only pilot, and I was just a code reader. It didn't get everything right, so I was still debugging and because I could read code and understand, I thought I was still learning. "Oh it wrote the code this way, that makes sense, I totally would have done that too." The best part was I was keeping up in my classes so much better, and I didn't have to dedicate the time it used to take to learn. I was working smarter, not harder, which is what we are all told to do. 

This phrase has actually caused me a lot of grief. Now that I have the context that I do, I understand that it was weighing on me pretty heavily. I grew up believing that an essential trait of smart successful people is that they were the ones that didn't have to try. The test-acers that didn't need to study or ask for help from tutors. This is just the way that smart people operate, they work smarter, so they don't have to work hard. I believed that because I was putting in so much effort meant that I was on the dumber side of my cohort. It would be so nice to finally feel smart. It would be hard to just start projects and start the reiteration process because it would remind me that I was not a smart worker. The smart worker would have known how to not work as hard and be done already; mistakes are evidence of the not-smart worker. 

AI was that silver bullet in a subtle way. It wasn't good enough to feel like cheating, I still spent hours on my homeworks debugging. Academic honesty is important to me, and I genuinely believed that this was a tool, and I was doing just as much thinking as I would normally. However, it would give me gems here and there that would make the process easy. Not just find the missing semicolon, it would fix for loops, rewrite logic bugs out without me noticing, and clean my code from 17 deep nested if trees to 5 line professionalism. The doubts left -- I didn't see that the clean code was the statistical average of the work of a million coders being replicated into my very well defined problem space -- I thought it was me improving and reaching the awesome confidence of mastery. I had made it, I was a smart worker at long last, ready to take the turbulent job market by storm.

## Insight

I used AI like this for about a year, from last year's February to this year's April. I had a moment that started some retrospection. I was going to start a new project in my lab, and I opened up python. I was craving the feeling of writing code after a bit of a hiatus with non CS classes and volunteer work with BYU EMS taking up more of my time. Surely I could jump right in and define a function, write a for loop, get command-line arguments, and output an answer. Bread and butter. However, I could not do a single one of those things from memory, in Python.

I was sitting in my lab, staring at my monitor, helpless. The rug had been pulled from under me, and a horrifying realization sunk in. I had competed in coding contests prior to using AI, this was something that I had done enough times to know I knew. I sat, waiting for clarity, for my hands to start typing out the boiler plate I needed. It never came, I only felt the instinct to open up Copilot, that was what my mind was giving me. A sense of grimness settled in, and I moved my mouse to the Copilot plugin, and deleted it.

The treasure of the skill I had painstakingly built in my first year of CS had not gotten better. With clarity, I saw the rust caked talent I had buried under my insecurity. AI had not multiplied it, I had offloaded my thinking to it and now I was incapable. The master builder vision was gone too. Without AI to tell me how to write code, and without that instinct, I couldn't see the possibilities anymore. I remembered Flowers for Algernon from my 8th grade English class. I had ascended to a level of excitement and capacity and then saw how I had reduced. 

"Anyone who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the eye are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind's eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye," - Plato, Republic VII.

From further attempts, I gauged that the damage done left me able to read simple code and write very little. I had spent time in the coding saddle that year, but realized I had been robbed the refinement of it. I conceptually understood the classes I had taken, as far as I had done work to learn and not had AI explain it to me. However, I had gotten out of touch with code itself. I knew music theory, but could not implement what I knew on my instrument. This was shocking because of the hours I had spent actively at my desk "coding." As if I had spend hours at a piano playing and not improving. But in hindsight I can see that it was playing itself, and I would arrange the chords.

"Once men turned their thinking over to machines in the hope that this would set them free. But that only permitted other men with machines to enslave them ... With few ambitions, most people allowed efficient machines to perform everyday tasks for them. Gradually, humans ceased to think, or dream... or truly live." - Frank Herbert, Dune books.

## Hard Work, Paying the Cost

This experience in April was enough for me to see where I would be as a developer if I used AI. I would be left to only achieve what was already done. Novel problems, new solutions would be out of my scope. I would be a command prompt engineer at the bottom of the skill ladder, only capable of what the company AI model is. I want to know the pieces, see the value in combining them in different ways, and be the master builder.

The way I was using AI is not uncommon, I would say in 2025 it is the default behavior now. The TA labs have been emptied, indicative of the new "TA." This shows me that the new average learner is the AI supervisor learner as I was. The middle ground of trying to coast as a smart learner has effectively been taken away. I can become a power user who can do it, or I can pretend to do it.

This summer, I faced the music, and I am working on becoming the smart worker that can only be achieved from the thousands of hours of hard, imperfect struggle work. I have taken the upfront investment approach. I learned vim, use Arch, and I have a web-tracker blocker running on the raspberry pi behind my TV I ssh into. I spent the summer scraping off the rust and breaking everything as fast as I could to rebuild it better again. I still feel the AI effects, in my 300 and 400 level classes, I am not the effective productive coder I was with AI. But I have drunk deeply from the knowledge of textbooks and real docs, and that does count for a lot. Admittedly, I fall behind sometimes, I don't get perfect grades, and I realize how much I don't know. But being in touch with my real capacity, and knowing what I truly do know is mine to keep is precious. 

AI isn't without its strengths. And as time goes on I will likely reestablish a relationship with it as a tool. It cannot be an instinctive part of me, nor something that I need in order to think about things. It will be a way for me to summarize new things and generate examples for me to learn from, which is fantastic, especially when I am taking the approach of learning from it, not using it to cut corners or dive into what I don't understand.

Hard work is the smart work.
